[WIP] Initial work (#1)
AuHau/js-ipfs-repo-migrations: README.md

 * `options` (object, optional) - options for the migration
 * `options.toVersion` (int, optional) - version to which the repo should be migrated. Defaults to the latest migration version.
 * `options.ignoreLock` (bool, optional) - if true will not lock the repo when applying migrations. Use with caution.
 * `options.repoOptions` (object, optional) - options that are passed to migrations, that use them to construct the datastore. (options are the same as for IPFSRepo).
 * `options.onProgress` (function, optional) - callback that is called after finishing execution of each migration to report progress.
 * `options.isDryRun` (bool, optional) - flag that indicates if it is a dry run that should give the same output as running a migration but without making any actual changes.
 
#### `onProgress(migration, counter, totalMigrations)`
 
Signature of the progress callback.

**Arguments:**
 * `migration` (object) - object of migration that just successfully finished running. See [Architecture of migrations](#architecture-of-migrations) for details.
 * `counter` (int) - index of current migration.
 * `totalMigrations` (int) - total count of migrations that will be run.

> ### `.revert(path, toVersion, {ignoreLock, options, onProgress, isDryRun}) -> Promise<void>`

Reviewer: Rename `options` -> `repoOptions`?

- SAFE. No data lost. Ever.
- Revertible. Tools must implement forward and backward (if possible) migrations.
- Tests. Migrations have to be well tested.
- To Spec. The tools must conform to the spec.

If your migration has several parts, it should be fail-proof enough that if one part of migration fails the previous changes
are reverted before propagating the error. If possible then the outcome should be consistent repo so it migration could
be run again. 

### Architecture of a migration

All migrations are placed in the `/migrations` folder. Each folder there represents one migration that follows the migration
API.

All migrations are collected in `/migrations/index.js`, which should not be edited manually. It is regenerated on
every run of `jsipfs-migrations add` (manual changes should follow the same style of modifications). 
**The order of migrations is important and migrations must be sorted in ascending order**.

Each migration must follow this API. It must export an object in its `index.js` that has following properties:

>  * `version` (int) - Number that represents the version which the repo will migrate to (eg. `migration-8` will move the repo to version 8).

Reviewer: `migration-8` -> `8` - it is a number not a string?

Author: Good catch. The property is a number, but the migrations are in folder `migration-<migration version number>`. I will rephrase this.

 * `description` (string) - Brief description of what the migrations does.
 * `migrate` (function) - Function that performs the migration (see signature of this function below)
 * `revert` (function) - If defined then this function will revert the migration to the previous version. Otherwise it is assumed that it is not possible to revert this migration.

> #### `.migrate(repoPath, isBrowser)`

Reviewer: Missing `options` from signature

> #### `.migrate(repoPath, isBrowser)`

Reviewer: Can we detect `isBrowser` using https://github.com/ipfs/js-ipfs-utils/blob/71a7bf54ab3636bae01da80d5a73aa7f839668ff/src/env.js#L6 instead?

_Do not confuse this function with the `require('ipfs-repo-migrations').migrate()` function that drives the whole migration process!_

Arguments:
 * `repoPath` (string) - absolute path to the root of the repo
 * `options` (object, optional) - object containing `IPFSRepo` options, that should be used to construct a datastore instance.

>  * `isBrowser` (bool) - indicates if the migration is run in a browser environment (as opposed to NodeJS)

Reviewer: Should `isBrowser` be an option?

Author: You mean as part of `options`/future `repoOptions`? If so, then I don't think so, because these options should be linked only to constructions of datastore and should follow the same semantic as the object passed to `IPFSRepo`...

 2. [`datastore-level`](https://github.com/ipfs/js-datastore-level) that is backed by LevelDB and is used mainly in the browser environment
 
 Both implementations share the same API and hence are interchangeable. 

 When the migration is run in a browser environment, `datastore-fs` is automatically replaced with `datastore-level` even 
 when it is directly imported (`require('datastore-fs')` will return `datastore-level` in a browser). 
 So with simple migrations you shouldn't worry about the difference between `datastore-fs` and `datastore-level` 
 and by default use the `datastore-fs` package (as the replace mechanism does not work vice versa).

### Guidelines

The recommended way to write a new migration is to first bootstrap a dummy migration using the CLI:

```sh
> npm run new-migration
```

A new folder is created with the bootstrapped migration. You can then simply fill in the required fields and 
write the rest of the migration! 

### Integration with js-ipfs

When a new migration is created, the repo version in [`js-ipfs-repo`](https://github.com/ipfs/js-ipfs-repo) should be updated with the new version,

> together with updated version of this package. Then the updated version should be propagated to `js-ipfs`.

Reviewer: I think some clarification is needed here. I'm assuming `ipfs-repo` depends on `ipfs-repo-migrations`? So the order should be to publish a new version of `ipfs-repo-migrations` and then `ipfs-repo`?

Would we then never actually use the "update to latest" functionality, because the repo would have to specify what version to up/down-grade to? Either that or we need to be really careful with the npm version range for `ipfs-repo-migrations` so that it doesn't pull in a version that can upgrade a repo to a version higher than what is supported.

For example.

1. I have `ipfs-repo@0.28.0` which operates on repo v7 and I depend on `ipfs-repo-migrations@^1.0.0`
2. Then I want to upgrade the repo to v8 so do the work in `ipfs-repo` and write a migration
3. I release `ipfs-repo@0.29.0` and `ipfs-repo-migrations@^1.1.0`

So `ipfs-repo` needs to specify the version to migrate to, or `ipfs-repo@0.28.0` will try to migrate to v8 when it only actually supports v7 because of the `^` version range on the `ipfs-repo-migrations` dep.

In summary: what I'm suggesting is that the call to `migrator.migrate` **requires** a version to up/down-grade to. 😁

Author: Good catch with the npm version range! Currently `ipfs-repo` always sets to which version should the repo be migrated to, so it makes sense to make it as mandatory. For the "migrate to latest" feature, which is mainly needed for CLI we can easily call the `getLatestMigrationVersion()`.

 to work under the version of the repo that it migrates to:

* `/src/repo/version.js`:`getVersion()` - retrieving repository's version
* `/src/repo/lock.js`:`lock()` - locking repository that uses file system
* `/src/repo/lock-memory.js`:`lock()` - locking repository that uses memory

Every migration must have test coverage. Tests for migrations should be placed in the `/test/migrations/` folder. Most probably
you will have to plug the tests into `browser.js`/`node.js` if they require specific bootstrapping on each platform.

### Empty migrations

For interop with go-ipfs it might be necessary just to bump a version of a repo without any actual 
modification as there might not be any changes needed in the JS implementation. For that purpose you can create an "empty migration".

The easiest way to do so is with the CLI:

```sh
> npm run new-migration -- --empty
```

This will create an empty migration with the next version.

### Migrations matrix

| IPFS repo version  | JS IPFS version  |
| -----------------: |:----------------:|
|                  7 | v0.0.0 - latest  |

## Developer

### Module versioning notes 

> In order to have good overview of what version of package contains what kind of migrations, this package follows this versioning schema: `0.<versionOfLastMigration>.<patches>`.

Reviewer: Tying the npm version to the repo version like this means we lose the ability to communicate breaking/feature change information for _this_ module to dependants.

For example, how would we communicate a change like the async/await refactor in this module? There's no repo version increase and we can't release a breaking change like that in a patch release.

Author: Well, you are right about this, but I don't believe there will be much of feature development/breaking changes in the future of this package. I believe that 80% of the changes will be adding new migrations, then 15% will be fixing bugs and 5% others...

In your example, we could communicate the breaking change using the major version. So for example from `0.8.0` we could bump to `1.8.0`... 
I kind of like the idea that you know what migrations the package contains just from the version number.

Reviewer: > In your example, we could communicate the breaking change using the major version. So for example from `0.8.0` we could bump to `1.8.0`...

We could...IMHO that would be a really strange versioning strategy though!

> I kind of like the idea that you know what migrations the package contains just from the version number.

I kind of do too, but I'm not convinced it's worth it!

Author: > We could...IMHO that would be a really strange versioning strategy though!

True, but following `0.<versionOfLastMigration>.<patches>` is already "strange" anyway ;-) 

What about having two parts in the version? E.g. `<semver>-<last version of migration>` so it could look like `0.2.0-7`? When new migration is added it would be bumped to `0.3.0-8`. This would allow us to have full-fledged semver capabilities and still have the information about migrations as part of the version?

What I am not sure is if this schema would not break some tooling? (aegir?)

Reviewer: Is there another reason other than convenience that would warrant this versioning strategy? 

If you don't already know the module the versioning strategy isn't going to convey any additional info. Secondly, it's really easy for new developers to miss this important piece of info since it's a small section at the bottom of the README. Thirdly, if you do know the module and are upgrading to get the latest migrations you'll probably just need the latest version of this module anyway right? It's quite unlikely you'll ever need an older version of the module since the newer versions contain all the past migrations as well.

Author: I would not call it convenience, but being careful. Having a different version of this package installed may lead to irreversible actions that can happen without your knowledge (eq. when you have `autoMigrations` on - which is currently the default). Yes, it won't most probably lose the data per se, but it might migrate data that are not to be migrated at that moment (for example you have test repo and "production" repo and you want to do some tests, but you accidentally migrate wrong one etc...).

Of course, having this schema won't prevent all mix ups, but it can improve the situation. From version update `0.4.0 --> 0.5.0` you can't be sure if there was new migration added (yes, it will be most of the cases), or maybe some feature change? You will have to go study release notes, which should be always the case, but I am pretty sure a lot of devs don't do that. 

In this light, I think having the `-<latestVersionOfMigration>` suffix is even better than the original schema as it stands out from Semver and should tingle dev's senses about what it most probably means.

I am not sure if my thoughts about this are not getting too tangled and strayed from reality, but I still feel like there are more pros over cons with this schema. Actually are there any cons? Except for the possible tooling side?

Reviewer: If you feel strongly about this I'll not stand in your way any further.

I'm undecided if I agree that a pre-release suffix is a better strategy than using the regular major/minor/patch versions. My issue with this it is that according to semver:

> A pre-release version indicates that the version is unstable and might not satisfy the intended compatibility requirements as denoted by its associated normal version

So this would convey to devs that it is not a stable version that should not be used without accepting some instability consequences.

I also do not know if AEgir will support you on this 😛

Author: Hmmm. Agree that this is a bit unfortunate. I checked finally SemVer spec and it directly supports ["build metadata"](https://github.com/ipfs/js-ipfs-repo-migrations/pull/4), which I feel could be exactly used for this. It stands aside in determining version precedence, which is a good thing.

We could have then schema `<semver>+<latestMigrationVersion>` (i.e `0.1.0+7`) to meet both points... Only thing I am not sure is about the format of the metadata. Should it be just integer of the version or somethings like `+migration.<int>`? It would be more self-explanatory, but longer...

# Migration tool for JS IPFS Repo

[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/made%20by-Protocol%20Labs-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](http://ipn.io)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/project-IPFS-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](http://ipfs.io/)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/freenode-%23ipfs-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](http://webchat.freenode.net/?channels=%23ipfs)
[![standard-readme compliant](https://img.shields.io/badge/standard--readme-OK-green.svg?style=flat-square)](https://github.com/RichardLitt/standard-readme)
[![js-standard-style](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-standard-brightgreen.svg?style=flat-square)](https://github.com/feross/standard)
![](https://img.shields.io/badge/npm-%3E%3D3.0.0-orange.svg?style=flat-square)
![](https://img.shields.io/badge/Node.js-%3E%3D10.0.0-orange.svg?style=flat-square)

> Migration framework for versioning of JS IPFS Repo

> This package takes inspiration from similar tool used by Go-IPFS: [fs-repo-migrations](https://github.com/ipfs/fs-repo-migrations/)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This package is inspired by the [go-ipfs repo migration tool](https://github.com/ipfs/fs-repo-migrations/)
```

## Lead Maintainer

???

## Table of Contents

- [Background](#background)
- [Install](#install)
  - [npm](#npm)
  - [Use in Node.js](#use-in-nodejs)
  - [Use in a browser with browserify, webpack or any other bundler](#use-in-a-browser-with-browserify-webpack-or-any-other-bundler)
  - [Use in a browser Using a script tag](#use-in-a-browser-using-a-script-tag)
- [Usage](#usage)
  - [Writing migration](#writing-migration)
  - [Migrations matrix](#migrations-matrix)
- [API](#api)
- [CLI](#cli)
- [Contribute](#contribute)
- [License](#license)

## Background

> As JS-IPFS evolves and new technologies, algorithms and data structures are being incorporated it is necessary to 

Reviewer 2: ```
As js-ipfs evolves and new technologies, algorithms and data structures are incorporated it is necessary to 
enable users to transition between versions. Different versions of js-ipfs may expect a different IPFS repo structure or content (see: [IPFS repo spec](https://github.com/ipfs/specs/tree/master/repo), [JS implementation](https://github.com/ipfs/js-ipfs-repo) ).
So the IPFS repo is versioned, and this package provides a framework to create migrations to transition
from one version of IPFS repo to the next/previous version.
```

enable users easy transition between versions. Different versions of JS-IPFS may expect different structure or content
of the IPFS repo (see: [IPFS repo spec](https://github.com/ipfs/specs/tree/master/repo), [JS implementation](https://github.com/ipfs/js-ipfs-repo) ).
For that reason IPFS repo is versioned and this package provides framework to create migrations which transits
one version of IPFS repo into next/previous one.

> This framework provides:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This framework:
```

 * Handles locking/unlocking of repository
 * Defines migrations API

>  * Executes and reports migrations in both direction: forward and backward

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * Executes and reports migrations in both directions: forward and backward
```

 * Simplifies creation of new migrations

## Install

### npm

```sh
> npm install ipfs-repo-migrations
```

### Use in Node.js

```js
const migrations = require('ipfs-repo-migrations')
```

### Use in a browser with browserify, webpack or any other bundler

```js
const migrations = require('ipfs-repo-migrations')
```

## Usage

Example:

```js
const migrations = require('ipfs-repo-migrations')
const getVersion = require('ipfs-repo-migrations/repo/version')

const repoPath = 'some/repo/path'
const repoVersion = await getVersion(repoPath)

if(repoVersion < migrations.getLatestMigrationVersion()){
  // Old repo! Lets migrate to latest version!
  await migrations.migrate(repoPath)
}
```

> On how to migrate your repository using CLI, you can find the recommended steps in [how to run migrations](./run.md) tutorial. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To migrate your repository using the CLI, see the [how to run migrations](./run.md) tutorial. 
```

> **For tools that build on top of `js-ipfs` and run mainly in the browser environment, be aware of disabling automatic

Reviewer 2: **For tools that build on top of `js-ipfs` and run mainly in the browser environment, be aware that disabling automatic
migrations leaves the user with no way to run the migrations because there is no CLI in the browser. In such
a case, you should provide a way to trigger migrations manually.**

migrations as user does not have any other way how to run the migrations because of lack of CLI in browser. In such
a case, you should provide a way how to trigger migrations manually.**

### Writing migration

Migrations are one of those things that can be extremely painful on users. At the end of the day, we want users never to have to think about it. The process should be:

- SAFE. No data lost. Ever.
- Revertible. Tools must implement forward and backward (if possible) migrations.
- Tests. Migrations have to be well tested.
- To Spec. The tools must conform to the spec.

#### Architecture of migrations

> All migrations are placed in `/migrations` folder. Each folder there represents one migration that follows migration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All migrations are placed in the `/migrations` folder. Each folder there represents one migration that follows the migration
```

API.

> All migrations are collected in `/migrations/index.js`, which should not be edited manually is it is regenerated on

Reviewer 2: All migrations are collected in `/migrations/index.js`, which should not be edited manually. It is regenerated on
every run of `jsipfs-migrations add` (manual changes should follow the same style of modifications). 
**The order of migrations is important and migrations must be sorted in ascending order**.

every run of `jsipfs-migrations add` (or the manual changes should follow same style of modifications). 
**The order of migrations is important and the migrations have to be sorted in the growing order**.

> Each migration has to follow this API. It has to export object in its `index.js` that has following properties:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each migration must follow this API. It must export an object in its `index.js` that has following properties:
```

>  * `version` (int) - Number that represents the version into which will be the repo migrated to (eq. `migration-8` will move the repo into version 8).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * `version` (int) - Number that represents the version which the repo will migrate to (eg. `migration-8` will move the repo to version 8).
```

 * `description` (string) - Brief description of what the migrations does.

>  * `migrate` (function) - Function that on execution will perform the migration, see signature of this function bellow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * `migrate` (function) - Function that performs the migration (see signature of this function below)
```

>  * `revert` (function) - If defined then this function will be used to revert the migration to previous version. Otherwise it is assumed that it is not possible to revert this migration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * `revert` (function) - If defined then this function will revert the migration to the previous version. Otherwise it is assumed that it is not possible to revert this migration.
```

##### `migrate(repoPath, isBrowser)`

_Do not confuse this function with the `require('ipfs-repo-migrations').migrate()` function that drives the whole migration process!_

Arguments:
 * `repoPath` (string) - absolute path to the root of the repo

>  * `options` (object, optional) - object containing `IPFSRepo` options, that should be used to construct datastore instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * `options` (object, optional) - object containing `IPFSRepo` options, that should be used to construct a datastore instance.
```

>  * `isBrowser` (bool) - indicates if the migration is run in browser environment in oppose to NodeJS

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * `isBrowser` (bool) - indicates if the migration is run in a browser environment (as opposed to NodeJS)
```

 
##### `revert(repoPath, isBrowser)`

_Do not confuse this function with the `require('ipfs-repo-migrations').revert()` function that drives the whole backward migration process!_

Arguments:
 * `repoPath` (string) - path to the root of the repo

>  * `options` (object, optional) - object containing `IPFSRepo` options, that should be used to construct datastore instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * `options` (object, optional) - object containing `IPFSRepo` options, that should be used to construct the datastore instance.
```

>  * `isBrowser` (bool) - indicates if the migration is run in browser environment in oppose to NodeJS

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * `isBrowser` (bool) - indicates if the migration is run in a browser environment (as opposed to NodeJS)
```

#### Browser vs. NodeJS environments

> Migration might need to distinguish in what environment it runs (browser vs. NodeJS), for this reason there is the argument

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The migration might need to distinguish in which environment it runs (browser vs. NodeJS). For this reason there is an argument
```

`isBrowser` passed to migrations functions. But with simple migrations it should not be necessary to distinguish between

> these environments as datastore implementation will handle the main differences. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
these environments as the datastore implementation will handle the main differences. 
```

There are currently two main datastore implementations:

>  1. [`datastore-fs`](https://github.com/ipfs/js-datastore-fs) that is backed by file system and is used mainly in NodeJS environment

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 1. [`datastore-fs`](https://github.com/ipfs/js-datastore-fs) that is backed by file system and is used mainly in the NodeJS environment
```

>  2. [`datastore-level`](https://github.com/ipfs/js-datastore-level) that is backed by LevelDB and is used mainly in browser environment

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 2. [`datastore-level`](https://github.com/ipfs/js-datastore-level) that is backed by LevelDB and is used mainly in the browser environment
```

>  Both implementations share same API and hence are interchangeable. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 Both implementations share the same API and hence are interchangeable. 
```

>  When the migration is run in browser environment the `datastore-fs` is automatically replaced with `datastore-level` even

Reviewer 2: ```
When the migration is run in a browser environment, `datastore-fs` is automatically replaced with `datastore-level` even when it is directly imported (`require('datastore-fs')` will return `datastore-level` in a browser). So with simple migrations you shouldn't worry about the difference between `datastore-fs` and `datastore-level` and by default use the `datastore-fs` package (as the replace mechanism does not work vice versa).
```

 when it is directly imported (`require('datastore-fs')` will return `datastore-level` in browser). Because of this mechanism
 with simple migrations you should not worry about difference between `datastore-fs` and `datastore-level` and by default 
 use the `datastore-fs` package (as the replace mechanism does not work vice vera).

#### Guidelines

> The recommended way to write a new migration is to first bootstrap an dummy migration using the CLI:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The recommended way to write a new migration is to first bootstrap a dummy migration using the CLI:
```

```sh
> jsipfs-migrations add
```

> Afterwards new folder is created with bootstrapped migration. You can then simply fill in the required fields and 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A new folder is created with the bootstrapped migration. You can then simply fill in the required fields and 
```

> write the rest of migration! 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
write the rest of the migration! 
```

> The `node_modules` of the migration should be committed to the repo to ensure that the dependencies are resolved even in

Reviewer 2: Is this still true?

Author: Nope, you are right, I missed this statement when I was rewriting this aspect. Thanks!

far future, when the package might be removed from registry. 

#### Migration's dependencies

> Size of `js-ipfs`'s bundle is crucial for distribution in browser environment, hence dependency management of all related

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The size of the `js-ipfs` bundle is crucial for distribution in a browser environment, so dependency management of all related
```

packages is important.

> If migration need to depend on some package, this dependency should be declared in the root's `package.json`. Author

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a migration needs to depend on some package, this dependency should be declared in the root's `package.json`. The author
```

> of migrations should be thoughtful about adding dependencies that would significantly increase the size of the final bundle.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of the migration should be thoughtful about adding dependencies that would significantly increase the size of the final bundle.
```

Most of the migration's dependencies will most likely overlap with `js-ipfs`'s dependencies and hence should not introduce

> any significant overhead, but it requires to keep the versions of these dependencies in sync with `js-ipfs`. For this 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
any significant overhead, but it is necessary to keep the versions of these dependencies in sync with `js-ipfs`. For this 
```

> reason migrations should be well tested to ensure correct behaviour over its dependencies updates. It might happen

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
reason migrations should be well tested to ensure correct behaviour over dependency updates.
```

> that update of some dependency could introduce breaking change, in such a case the next steps should be discussed with broader 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An update of some dependency could introduce breaking change. In such a case the next steps should be discussed with a broader 
```

audience. 

#### Integration with js-ipfs

> When new migration is created, the repo version in [`js-ipfs-repo`](https://github.com/ipfs/js-ipfs-repo) should be updated with the new version,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a new migration is created, the repo version in [`js-ipfs-repo`](https://github.com/ipfs/js-ipfs-repo) should be updated with the new version,
```

> together with updated version of this package. And afterwards propagate the updated version to `js-ipfs`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
together with updated version of this package. Then the updated version should be propagated to `js-ipfs`.
```

#### Tests

> If migration affects working of any of the following functionality, it has to provide tests for the following functions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a migration affects any of the following functionality, it must provide tests for the following functions
```

 to work under the version of the repo that it migrates to:

* `/src/repo/version.js`:`getVersion()` - retrieving repository's version
* `/src/repo/lock.js`:`lock()` - locking repository that uses file system
* `/src/repo/lock-memory.js`:`lock()` - locking repository that uses memory

> Every mgration has to have a test coverage. Tests for migration should be placed in `/test/migrations/` folder. Most probably

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Every mgration must have test coverage. Tests for migrations should be placed in the `/test/migrations/` folder. Most probably
```

> you will have to plug the tests into `browser.js`/`node.js` if they require specific bootstrap on each platform.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you will have to plug the tests into `browser.js`/`node.js` if they require specific bootstrapping on each platform.
```

#### Empty migrations

> For inter-operable reasons with Go-IPFS it might be necessary just to bump a version of repo without any actual 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For interop with go-ipfs it might be necessary just to bump a version of a repo without any actual 
```

> modification as there might not be any changes needed in JS implementation. For that you can create "empty migration".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
modification as there might not be any changes needed in the JS implementation. For that purpose you can create an "empty migration".
```

> The easiest way is to use the CLI for that:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The easiest way to do so is with the CLI:
```

```sh
> jsipfs-migrations add --empty
```

> This will create empty migration with next version in line.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will create an empty migration with the next version.
```

### Migrations matrix

| IPFS repo version  | JS IPFS version  |
| -----------------: |:----------------:|
|                  7 | v0.0.0 - latest  |

## API

### `migrate(path, {toVersion, ignoreLock, repoOptions, onProgress, isDryRun}) -> Promise<void>`

> Executes forward migration to specific version or if not specified to the latest version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Executes a forward migration to a specific version, or to the latest version if a specific version is not specified.
```

**Arguments:**

 * `path` (string, mandatory) - path to the repo to be migrated
 * `options` (object, optional) - options for the migration

>  * `options.toVersion` (int, optional) - version to which the repo should be migrated to. If left out the version of latest migration is used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * `options.toVersion` (int, optional) - version to which the repo should be migrated. Defaults to the latest migration version.
```

>  * `options.ignoreLock` (bool, optional) - if true won't lock the repo for applying the migrations. Use with caution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * `options.ignoreLock` (bool, optional) - if true will not lock the repo when applying migrations. Use with caution.
```

>  * `options.repoOptions` (object, optional) - options that are passed to migrations, that use them to correctly construct datastore. Options are same like for IPFSRepo.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * `options.repoOptions` (object, optional) - options that are passed to migrations, that use them to construct the datastore. (options are the same as for IPFSRepo).
```

 * `options.onProgress` (function, optional) - callback that is called after finishing execution of each migration to report progress.

>  * `options.isDryRun` (bool, optional) - flag that indicates if it is a dry run that should imitate running migration without actually any change.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * `options.isDryRun` (bool, optional) - flag that indicates if it is a dry run that should give the same output as running a migration but without making any actual changes.
```

 
#### `onProgress(migration, counter, totalMigrations)`
 
Signature of the progress callback.

**Arguments:**
 * `migration` (object) - object of migration that just successfully finished running. See [Architecture of migrations](#architecture-of-migrations) for details.

>  * `counter` (int) - current number of migration in the planned migrations streak.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * `counter` (int) - index of current migration.
```

>  * `totalMigrations` (int) - total count of migrations that are planned to be run.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * `totalMigrations` (int) - total count of migrations that will be run.
```

### `revert(path, toVersion, {ignoreLock, options, onProgress, isDryRun}) -> Promise<void>`

> Executes backward migration to specific version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Executes backward migration to a specific version.
```

**Arguments:**

 * `path` (string, mandatory) - path to the repo to be reverted
 * `toVersion` (int, mandatory) - version to which the repo should be reverted to. 
 * `options` (object, optional) - options for the reversion

>  * `options.ignoreLock` (bool, optional) - if true won't lock the repo for applying the migrations. Use with caution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * `options.ignoreLock` (bool, optional) - if true will not lock the repo when applying migrations. Use with caution.
```

>  * `options.options` (object, optional) - options that are passed to migrations, that use them to correctly construct datastore. Options are same like for IPFSRepo.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * `options.options` (object, optional) - options that are passed to migrations, that use them to construct the datastore. (options are the same as for IPFSRepo).
```

 * `options.onProgress` (function, optional) - callback that is called after finishing execution of each migration to report progress.

>  * `options.isDryRun` (bool, optional) - flag that indicates if it is a dry run that should imitate running migration without actually any change.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * `options.isDryRun` (bool, optional) - flag that indicates if it is a dry run that should give the same output as running a migration but without making any actual changes.
```

 
### `getLatestMigrationVersion() -> int`

> Return the version of latest migration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Return the version of the latest migration.
```

## CLI

> The package comes also with CLI that is exposed as NodeJS binary with name `jsipfs-repo-migrations`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The CLI is a NodeJS binary named `jsipfs-repo-migrations`. 
```

  - [npm](#npm)
  - [Use in Node.js](#use-in-nodejs)
  - [Use in a browser with browserify, webpack or any other bundler](#use-in-a-browser-with-browserify-webpack-or-any-other-bundler)
  - [Use in a browser Using a script tag](#use-in-a-browser-using-a-script-tag)
- [Usage](#usage)
  - [Writing migration](#writing-migration)
  - [Migrations matrix](#migrations-matrix)
- [API](#api)
- [CLI](#cli)
- [Versioning](#versioning)
- [Contribute](#contribute)
- [License](#license)

## Background

As js-ipfs evolves and new technologies, algorithms and data structures are incorporated it is necessary to 
enable users to transition between versions. Different versions of js-ipfs may expect a different IPFS repo structure or content (see: [IPFS repo spec](https://github.com/ipfs/specs/tree/master/repo), [JS implementation](https://github.com/ipfs/js-ipfs-repo) ).
So the IPFS repo is versioned, and this package provides a framework to create migrations to transition
from one version of IPFS repo to the next/previous version.

This framework:
 * Handles locking/unlocking of repository
 * Defines migrations API
 * Executes and reports migrations in both directions: forward and backward

>  * Simplifies creation of new migrations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 * Simplifies creation of new migrations
 * Works on the browser too!
```

## Install

### npm

```sh
> npm install ipfs-repo-migrations
```

### Use in Node.js

```js
const migrations = require('ipfs-repo-migrations')
```

### Use in a browser with browserify, webpack or any other bundler

```js
const migrations = require('ipfs-repo-migrations')
```

## Usage

Example:

```js
const migrations = require('ipfs-repo-migrations')

> const getVersion = require('ipfs-repo-migrations/repo/version')

Reviewer 3: This is an actual antipattern. Teaching users to require specific files will make them fall on their face as a simple file name change can go unnoticed and break everyone's usage. Instead, use `migrations.getVersion`

Author: Fair point. Yet the `getVersion` function is there only for CLI sake and is not part of the main API. I wrote it here only to make the example more clear. I would suggest then only rewrite the example?

Reviewer: For this example I'd just use `const currentRepoVersion = 7`

const repoPath = 'some/repo/path'
const repoVersion = await getVersion(repoPath)

if(repoVersion < migrations.getLatestMigrationVersion()){
  // Old repo! Lets migrate to latest version!
  await migrations.migrate(repoPath)
}
```

To migrate your repository using the CLI, see the [how to run migrations](./run.md) tutorial. 

> **For tools that build on top of `js-ipfs` and run mainly in the browser environment, be aware that disabling automatic

Reviewer 3: This should go into js-ipfs docs :)

migrations leaves the user with no way to run the migrations because there is no CLI in the browser. In such
a case, you should provide a way to trigger migrations manually.**

> ### Writing migration

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Creating a new migration
```

Migrations are one of those things that can be extremely painful on users. At the end of the day, we want users never to have to think about it. The process should be:

- SAFE. No data lost. Ever.
- Revertible. Tools must implement forward and backward (if possible) migrations.
- Tests. Migrations have to be well tested.
- To Spec. The tools must conform to the spec.

If your migration has several parts, it should be fail-proof enough that if one part of migration fails the previous changes
are reverted before propagating the error. If possible then the outcome should be consistent repo so it migration could
be run again. 

> #### Architecture of migrations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Architecture of a migration
```

All migrations are placed in the `/migrations` folder. Each folder there represents one migration that follows the migration
API.

All migrations are collected in `/migrations/index.js`, which should not be edited manually. It is regenerated on
every run of `jsipfs-migrations add` (manual changes should follow the same style of modifications). 
**The order of migrations is important and migrations must be sorted in ascending order**.

Each migration must follow this API. It must export an object in its `index.js` that has following properties:

 * `version` (int) - Number that represents the version which the repo will migrate to (eg. `migration-8` will move the repo to version 8).
 * `description` (string) - Brief description of what the migrations does.
 * `migrate` (function) - Function that performs the migration (see signature of this function below)
 * `revert` (function) - If defined then this function will revert the migration to the previous version. Otherwise it is assumed that it is not possible to revert this migration.

> ##### `migrate(repoPath, isBrowser)`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### `.migrate(repoPath, isBrowser)`
```

> _Do not confuse this function with the `require('ipfs-repo-migrations').migrate()` function that drives the whole migration process!_

Reviewer 3: After reading this, I am now confused. What is the different then?

Author: Damn 😂 

There are two functions with the same name in this tool:

 - root one (eq. `require('ipfs-repo-migrations').migrate()`) which is part of the main API, that upon calling will migrate the repository to new version
 - part of "migration API" that is present on the objects exported in each migration for example in `require('ipfs-repo-migrations/migrations/migration-8').migrate()` that only migrate forward the repo by one version

Do you have some idea how to make it more clear?

Reviewer 3: It makes more sense if you move the API to the top, so that is the first thing the user sees. Otherwise it is information overload and the user didn't even get the time to test the module.

Author: Yup, I have done that. It is definitely better flow like this...

Arguments:
 * `repoPath` (string) - absolute path to the root of the repo
 * `options` (object, optional) - object containing `IPFSRepo` options, that should be used to construct a datastore instance.
 * `isBrowser` (bool) - indicates if the migration is run in a browser environment (as opposed to NodeJS)
 

> ##### `revert(repoPath, isBrowser)`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### `.revert(repoPath, isBrowser)`
```

_Do not confuse this function with the `require('ipfs-repo-migrations').revert()` function that drives the whole backward migration process!_

Arguments:
 * `repoPath` (string) - path to the root of the repo
 * `options` (object, optional) - object containing `IPFSRepo` options, that should be used to construct the datastore instance.
 * `isBrowser` (bool) - indicates if the migration is run in a browser environment (as opposed to NodeJS)

> #### Browser vs. NodeJS environments

Reviewer 3: This could be done automatically, no? All it should care about is the path

Author: Yes, as mentioned lower in most of the cases the difference is handled by datastore implementation. But there might be a need for this in some more complicated migrations.

The migration might need to distinguish in which environment it runs (browser vs. NodeJS). For this reason there is an argument
`isBrowser` passed to migrations functions. But with simple migrations it should not be necessary to distinguish between
these environments as the datastore implementation will handle the main differences. 

There are currently two main datastore implementations:
 1. [`datastore-fs`](https://github.com/ipfs/js-datastore-fs) that is backed by file system and is used mainly in the NodeJS environment
 2. [`datastore-level`](https://github.com/ipfs/js-datastore-level) that is backed by LevelDB and is used mainly in the browser environment
 
 Both implementations share the same API and hence are interchangeable. 

 When the migration is run in a browser environment, `datastore-fs` is automatically replaced with `datastore-level` even 
 when it is directly imported (`require('datastore-fs')` will return `datastore-level` in a browser). 
 So with simple migrations you shouldn't worry about the difference between `datastore-fs` and `datastore-level` 
 and by default use the `datastore-fs` package (as the replace mechanism does not work vice versa).

> #### Guidelines

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Guidelines
```

The recommended way to write a new migration is to first bootstrap a dummy migration using the CLI:

```sh

> > jsipfs-migrations add

Reviewer 3: This requires for folks to install the module globally. I would rather suggest it as a npm script

```suggestion
> npm run new-migration
```

```

A new folder is created with the bootstrapped migration. You can then simply fill in the required fields and 
write the rest of the migration! 

> #### Migration's dependencies

Reviewer 3: This section can be removed. I don't think it introduces any new concept to avid js developers that will be doing something as advanced as a repo migration.

The size of the `js-ipfs` bundle is crucial for distribution in a browser environment, so dependency management of all related
packages is important.

If a migration needs to depend on some package, this dependency should be declared in the root's `package.json`. The author
of the migration should be thoughtful about adding dependencies that would significantly increase the size of the final bundle.

Most of the migration's dependencies will most likely overlap with `js-ipfs`'s dependencies and hence should not introduce
any significant overhead, but it is necessary to keep the versions of these dependencies in sync with `js-ipfs`. For this 
reason migrations should be well tested to ensure correct behaviour over dependency updates.
An update of some dependency could introduce breaking change. In such a case the next steps should be discussed with a broader 
audience. 

> #### Integration with js-ipfs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Integration with js-ipfs
```

When a new migration is created, the repo version in [`js-ipfs-repo`](https://github.com/ipfs/js-ipfs-repo) should be updated with the new version,
together with updated version of this package. Then the updated version should be propagated to `js-ipfs`.

> #### Tests

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Tests
```

If a migration affects any of the following functionality, it must provide tests for the following functions
 to work under the version of the repo that it migrates to:

* `/src/repo/version.js`:`getVersion()` - retrieving repository's version
* `/src/repo/lock.js`:`lock()` - locking repository that uses file system
* `/src/repo/lock-memory.js`:`lock()` - locking repository that uses memory

Every migration must have test coverage. Tests for migrations should be placed in the `/test/migrations/` folder. Most probably
you will have to plug the tests into `browser.js`/`node.js` if they require specific bootstrapping on each platform.

> #### Empty migrations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Empty migrations
```

For interop with go-ipfs it might be necessary just to bump a version of a repo without any actual 
modification as there might not be any changes needed in the JS implementation. For that purpose you can create an "empty migration".

The easiest way to do so is with the CLI:

```sh
> jsipfs-migrations add --empty
```

This will create an empty migration with the next version.

### Migrations matrix

| IPFS repo version  | JS IPFS version  |
| -----------------: |:----------------:|
|                  7 | v0.0.0 - latest  |

> ## API

Reviewer 3: The API of the module should come before the explanation of how to create a new migration as that is how most people will use the module

> ### `migrate(path, {toVersion, ignoreLock, repoOptions, onProgress, isDryRun}) -> Promise<void>`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### `.migrate(path, {toVersion, ignoreLock, repoOptions, onProgress, isDryRun}) -> Promise<void>`
```

Executes a forward migration to a specific version, or to the latest version if a specific version is not specified.

**Arguments:**

 * `path` (string, mandatory) - path to the repo to be migrated
 * `options` (object, optional) - options for the migration
 * `options.toVersion` (int, optional) - version to which the repo should be migrated. Defaults to the latest migration version.
 * `options.ignoreLock` (bool, optional) - if true will not lock the repo when applying migrations. Use with caution.
 * `options.repoOptions` (object, optional) - options that are passed to migrations, that use them to construct the datastore. (options are the same as for IPFSRepo).

>  * `options.onProgress` (function, optional) - callback that is called after finishing execution of each migration to report progress.

Reviewer 3: Is this for progress bars?

Author: Yup

 * `options.isDryRun` (bool, optional) - flag that indicates if it is a dry run that should give the same output as running a migration but without making any actual changes.
 
#### `onProgress(migration, counter, totalMigrations)`
 
Signature of the progress callback.

**Arguments:**
 * `migration` (object) - object of migration that just successfully finished running. See [Architecture of migrations](#architecture-of-migrations) for details.
 * `counter` (int) - index of current migration.
 * `totalMigrations` (int) - total count of migrations that will be run.

> ### `revert(path, toVersion, {ignoreLock, options, onProgress, isDryRun}) -> Promise<void>`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### `.revert(path, toVersion, {ignoreLock, options, onProgress, isDryRun}) -> Promise<void>`
```

 * `toVersion` (int, mandatory) - version to which the repo should be reverted to. 
 * `options` (object, optional) - options for the reversion
 * `options.ignoreLock` (bool, optional) - if true will not lock the repo when applying migrations. Use with caution.
 * `options.options` (object, optional) - options that are passed to migrations, that use them to construct the datastore. (options are the same as for IPFSRepo).
 * `options.onProgress` (function, optional) - callback that is called after finishing execution of each migration to report progress.
 * `options.isDryRun` (bool, optional) - flag that indicates if it is a dry run that should give the same output as running a migration but without making any actual changes.
 
### `getLatestMigrationVersion() -> int`

Return the version of the latest migration.

## CLI

The CLI is a NodeJS binary named `jsipfs-repo-migrations`. 
It has several commands:

 * `migrate` - performs forward/backward migration to specific or latest version.
 * `status` - check repo for migrations that should be run.
 * `add` - bootstraps new migration.
 
For further details see the `--help` pages.

> ## Versioning

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Developer

### Module versioning notes 
```
